12 ways to calm anxious thoughts
Many tips and tricks can help calm anxiety, including breathing exercises, yoga, mindfulness meditation, and music therapy. If these do not help, a person may find professional treatment beneficial.
Anxiety can cause significant stress, along with racing thoughts, sweating, and a fast heartbeat. However, there are ways to manage it.
This article outlines tips and techniques for developing a calmer, less anxious state of mind. We also provide information on medications and talking therapies to treat severe or persistent anxiety.
1. Drink less caffeine
Adrenaline is a hormone involved in the body’s stress response . Caffeine is a stimulant that causes a spike in adrenaline levels, and this can make some people feel anxious or on edge.
Coffee is one of the most popular sources of caffeine, but it is also present in:
tea
sodas
energy drinks
chocolate
People who notice a connection between their caffeine intake and anxiety should try limiting or stopping caffeine consumption.
People should do this slowly to avoid caffeine withdrawal . Withdrawal can cause physical symptoms similar to those of anxiety.
2. Breathing exercises
Diaphragmatic breathing is a type of deep breathing technique that some find helpful for calming anxiety.
People can practice the following technique:
Lie flat on the back with the knees bent and the soles of the feet on the floor.
Place one hand on the upper chest and the other on the stomach, below the ribcage.
Breathe in slowly and deeply through the nose. Draw the breath down toward the stomach so that the hand on the stomach rises upward. Make sure that the hand on the chest stays still.
Exhale slowly through pursed lips, drawing the belly button toward the floor. The hand on the stomach should return to its original position. The hand on the chest should remain still.
3. Exercise
In 2022 , researchers found that people who followed a 12-week exercise program saw a reduction in symptoms of depression and anxiety compared with those who did no exercise.
The exercise group did cardiorespiratory and resistance training . Moreover, those who exercised to a higher intensity saw greater improvements in anxiety scores than those who did lower intensity activity.
4. Practice yoga
Many people find yoga beneficial for their mental health. It involves both exercising the body and focusing the mind on breathing, and may have a calming effect.
A 2021 review of past research notes that yoga has promise as a complementary therapy for anxiety, although more high-quality studies are necessary.
5. Listen to music
A 2022 review of past research found significant evidence that listening to music can alleviate anxiety across a range of people and situations.
People can try listening to sounds they find calming, or use music as a distraction.
6. Practice mindfulness or meditation
Mindfulness encourages a person to focus on feelings, thoughts, or bodily sensations that are happening in the present moment, rather than the past or future.
This can make it helpful for those with anxiety, as anxious thoughts often involve ruminating on the past, or worrying about the future.
7. Avoid procrastination
People with anxiety may be prone to putting off important tasks or projects to temporarily avoid stress.
However, procrastination often results in a last-minute rush to complete tasks before a deadline. This causes even greater stress.
Instead of avoiding the task, try taking small, achievable steps towards it. For example, a person who needs to study for a test could commit to studying one topic for just 10 minutes.
Sometimes, just making this initial step helps people get started on tasks they find daunting, reducing task paralysis.
8. Try journaling
Journaling and other types of writing can help a person express themselves and organize their thoughts and feelings. Therapists may recommend it for addressing mental health conditions , including anxiety.
A 2022 review of the benefits of journaling concluded that it is a cost-effective therapy with a low risk of side effects. It can support other forms of therapy.
9. Get some good sleep
Anxiety can prevent people from having enough sleep, but lack of sleep can also make anxiety symptoms worse. A 2022 study says there may be a link between anxiety and sleep problems because of their effects on brain activity.
As a result, when a person is feeling anxious, it is important to set aside enough time to get a good night’s sleep. It may help to:
wind down by doing relaxing activities in the evening
ensure the bedroom is cool and comfortable
having a warm bath or shower before bed
avoid using screens close to bedtime, or if a person wakes during the night
If lifestyle remedies do not help a person sleep, a doctor can suggest other therapies.
10. Limit alcohol intake
When a person is stressed, it may feel as if alcohol will take the anxiety away. But alcohol will not solve anxiety, and a person may feel worse after drinking.
Anyone who faces challenges reducing their alcohol intake should seek medical help.
11. Cognitive behavioral therapy
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) helps people recognize how thought patterns can influence their mood and behavior, and find ways to replace them with more constructive thoughts and responses.
This often involves doing mental exercises to challenge or disarm unhelpful, anxious thoughts. For example, when a person notices a worrying thought, they might ask themselves:
if there is any evidence that the thought is true
what they would say to a friend if they were thinking this way
what is the worst that could happen, and then make a plan for how they would handle it
A psychotherapist can help a person learn more coping skills and begin to improve persistent or severe anxiety.
12. Medication
Sometimes, a doctor may prescribe medication alongside talk therapies for anxiety. Some common medications include:
beta-blockers, which reduce symptoms such as trembling
antidepressants, which affect the ways the brain responds to stress
anti-anxiety medications, such as benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines are for short-term use only, as there is a risk of dependence and withdrawal symptoms .
Summary
Many people feel anxious sometimes. However, many tips and techniques can help people reduce their stress levels and promote calmness.
People should talk with a doctor if they experience severe or persistent anxiety. They may recommend medication, talking therapy, or a combination of these treatments.
