10 Breathing Exercises to Try When You’re Feeling Stressed
Several breathing techniques could help you feel calmer and more relaxed if you’re dealing with high levels of stress. All you need is a quiet space where you can pay attention to your breathing.
Breathing exercises don’t have to take a lot of time out of your day. It’s about setting aside time to pay attention to your breathing. Here are a few ideas to get started:
Begin with 2 to 5 minutes a day, and increase your time as the exercise becomes easier and more comfortable.
Practice multiple times a day.
Schedule set times or practice conscious breathing as you feel the need.
Read on to learn how to do 10 different breathing exercises. You may find that certain respiratory exercises appeal to you right away.
1. Pursed lip breathing
This simple breathing technique helps to slow down your breathing pace by having you apply deliberate effort in each breath.
You can practice pursed lip breathing at any time. It may be especially useful during activities such as bending, lifting, or stair climbing.
Practice using this breath 4 to 5 times a day when you begin so that you can correctly learn the breathing pattern.
To do it:
Relax your neck and shoulders.
Keeping your mouth closed, inhale slowly through your nose for 2 counts.
Pucker or purse your lips as though you were going to whistle.
Exhale slowly by blowing air through your pursed lips for a count of 4.
2. Diaphragmatic breathing
Diaphragmatic breathing (aka belly breathing) can help you use your diaphragm properly.
A 2020 meta-analysis shows this type of breathing is particularly helpful in people with breathing challenges due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) , heart problems, or cancer.
It may also help reduce stress and help with challenges related to health conditions, such as:
eating disorders
constipation
high blood pressure
migraine headaches
Practice diaphragmatic breathing for 5 to 10 minutes 3 to 4 times daily.
When you begin, you may feel tired, but over time the technique should become easier and should feel more natural.
Lie on your back with your knees slightly bent and your head on a pillow.
You may place a pillow under your knees for support.
Place one hand on your upper chest and one hand below your rib cage, allowing you to feel the movement of your diaphragm.
Slowly inhale through your nose, feeling your stomach pressing into your hand.
Keep your other hand as still as possible.
Exhale using pursed lips as you tighten your abdominal muscles, keeping your upper hand completely still.
You can place a book on your abdomen to make the exercise more difficult. Once you learn how to do belly breathing lying down, you can increase the difficulty by trying it while sitting in a chair. You can then practice the technique while performing your daily activities.
3. Breath focus technique
This deep breathing technique uses imagery or focus words and phrases.
You can choose a focus word that makes you smile, feel relaxed, or is simply neutral. Some examples include the words peace, let go, or relax. It can be any word that suits you to focus on and repeat through your practice.
As you build up your breath focus practice, you can start with a 10-minute session. Gradually increase the duration until your sessions are at least 20 minutes.
To do it:
Sit or lie down in a comfortable place.
Bring your awareness to your breaths without trying to change how you’re breathing.
Alternate between normal and deep breaths a few times. Notice any differences between normal breathing and deep breathing. Notice how your abdomen expands with deep inhalations.
Note how shallow breathing feels compared to deep breathing.
Practice your deep breathing for a few minutes.
Place one hand below your belly button, keeping your belly relaxed, and notice how it rises with each inhale and falls with each exhale.
Let out a loud sigh with each exhale.
Begin the practice of breath focus by combining this deep breathing with imagery and a focus word or phrase that will support relaxation.
You can imagine that the air you inhale brings waves of peace and calm throughout your body. Mentally say, “Inhaling peace and calm.”
Imagine that the air you exhale washes away tension and anxiety. You can say to yourself, “Exhaling tension and anxiety.”
4. Lion’s breath
Lion’s breath is an energizing yoga breathing practice that may help relieve tension in your jaw and facial muscles.
It’s also known in yoga as Lion’s Pose or Simhasana in Sanskrit.
To do this:
Come into a comfortable seated position. You can sit back on your heels or cross your legs.
Press your palms against your knees with your fingers spread wide.
Inhale deeply through your nose and open your eyes wide.
At the same time, open your mouth wide and stick out your tongue, bringing the tip down toward your chin.
Contract the muscles at the front of your throat as you exhale out through your mouth by making a long “haaa” sound.
You can turn your gaze to look at the space between your eyebrows or the tip of your nose.
Do this breath 2 to 3 times.
5. Alternate nostril breathing
Alternate nostril breathing , known as Nadi Shodhana Pranayama in Sanskrit, is a breathing practice for relaxation.
This breathing technique has been shown to enhance cardiovascular function and lower heart rate.
Nadi Shodhana is best practiced on an empty stomach. Avoid the practice if you’re feeling sick or congested. Keep your breath smooth and even throughout the practice.
To do this:
Choose a comfortable seated position.
Lift your right hand toward your nose, pressing your first and middle fingers down toward your palm and leaving your other fingers extended.
After an exhale, use your right thumb to gently close your right nostril.
Inhale through your left nostril and then close your left nostril with your right pinky and ring fingers.
Release your thumb and exhale out through your right nostril.
Inhale through your right nostril and then close this nostril.
Release your fingers to open your left nostril and exhale through this side.
This is one cycle.
Continue this breathing pattern for up to 5 minutes.
Finish your session with an exhale on the left side.
6. Equal breathing
Equal breathing is known as Sama Vritti in Sanskrit. This breathing technique focuses on making your inhales and exhales the same length. Making your breath smooth and steady can help bring about balance and equanimity.
Research on older adults with high blood pressure showed that this technique may help improve mental well-being and increase the oxygen supply to the brain and lungs.
You should find a breath length that is not too easy and not too difficult. You also don’t want it to be too fast in order to maintain it throughout the practice. Usually, this is between 3 and 5 counts.
Once you get used to equal breathing while seated, you can do it during your yoga practice or other daily activities.
To do it:
Choose a comfortable seated position.
Breathe in and out through your nose.
Count during each inhale and exhale to make sure they are even in duration. Alternatively, choose a word or short phrase to repeat during each inhale and exhale.
You can add a slight pause for breath retention after each inhale and exhale if you feel comfortable. (Normal breathing involves a natural pause.)
Continue practicing this breath for at least 5 minutes.
7. Resonant or coherent breathing
Resonant breathing, also known as coherent breathing, is when you breathe at a rate of 5 full breaths per minute. You can achieve this rate by inhaling and exhaling for a count of 5.
Breathing at this rate maximizes your heart rate variability (HRV), reduces stress, and, according to a 2017 study , can reduce symptoms of depression when combined with Iyengar yoga.
To do this:
Inhale for a count of 5.
Exhale for a count of 5.
Continue this breathing pattern for at least a few minutes.
8. Sitali breath
This yoga breathing practice helps you lower your body temperature and relax your mind.
Slightly extend your breath in length but don’t force it. Since you inhale through your mouth during Sitali breath, you may want to choose a place to practice that’s free of any potential allergens and air pollution.
To do this:
Choose a comfortable seated position.
Stick out your tongue and curl your tongue to bring the outer edges together.
If your tongue doesn’t do this, you can purse your lips.
Inhale through your mouth.
Exhale out through your nose.
Continue breathing like this for up to 5 minutes.
9. Deep breathing
Deep breathing helps to relieve shortness of breath by preventing air from getting trapped in your lungs and helping you to breathe in fresher air. It may help you to feel more relaxed and centered.
To do this:
While standing or sitting, draw your elbows back slightly to allow your chest to expand.
Take a deep inhalation through your nose.
Retain your breath for a count of 5.
Slowly release your breath by exhaling through your nose.
10. Humming bee breath (Bhramari)
This yoga breathing practice’s unique sensation helps create instant calm and is especially soothing around your forehead.
Some people use humming bee breath to relieve frustration, anxiety, and anger. Research shows it may help reduce your heart rate, think more clearly, and feel less irritable or stressed.
It’s best to practice in a place where you’re free to make a humming sound.
To do this:
Choose a comfortable seated position.
Close your eyes and relax your face.
Place your first fingers on the tragus cartilage that partially covers your ear canal.
Inhale and gently press your fingers into the cartilage as you exhale.
Keeping your mouth closed, make a loud humming sound.
Continue for as long as is comfortable.
Frequently asked questions
What is the 4-7-8 breath method?
The 4-7-8 breathing technique involves inhaling for 4 seconds, holding your breath for 7 seconds, and exhaling for 8 seconds.
What are the 5 main breathing techniques to relieve stress?
Breathing techniques for stress relief may include alternate nose breathing, humming bee breathing, Lion’s breath, equal breathing, and breath focus technique. Just focusing on your breath for a few minutes can impact your stress levels.
How to fix shallow breathing?
Shallow rapid breathing, also known as tachypnea, may be a sign of an underlying health condition. If you frequently experience shallow breathing, speak with a healthcare professional. They can provide a proper diagnosis and treatment plan for you.
Takeaway
You can try most of these breath exercises right away.
Check with your doctor if you have any medical concerns or take medications.
If you want to learn more about breathing practices, you can consult a respiratory therapist or a yoga teacher who specializes in breathing practices.
Discontinue the practice if you experience any feelings of discomfort or agitation.
