Taking a Better Breath
Many muscles and organs are involved with breathing. If you have difficulty getting enough air, try changing your posture or sleeping position. Breathing exercises may also help.
If you breathe effectively, your breath will be smooth, steady, and controlled. You should feel relaxed and get enough air without straining.
Breathing exercises can help if this isn’t true for your breathing.
Practice breathing with your diaphragm
Diaphragm breathing exercises will help you use your diaphragm correctly. Try to do this technique when you’re feeling rested and relaxed.
Regularly performing these diaphragmatic breathing practices may help you :
clear your lungs of stale air
increase oxygen levels
strengthen your diaphragm
use less exertion and energy to breathe
Always talk to your doctor before starting any breathing exercises, especially if you have any medical conditions that affect your breathing, are on any medications, or are pregnant.
Practice diaphragmatic breathing at home. When you first start, aim to do 5 to 10 minutes of this exercise 3 to 4 times daily.
You may tire while doing this exercise since correctly using your diaphragm requires more effort. But once you get used to diaphragmatic breathing, it’ll become natural and easier.
Slowly increase the duration of time you spend diaphragmatic breathing each day. Place a book on your abdomen to increase the difficulty of the exercise or to help you focus.
Diaphragm breathing lying down
Lie on your back with your knees bent and a pillow under your head.
Place a pillow under your knees to support your legs.
Put one hand on your upper chest and the other below your rib cage so you can feel the movement of your diaphragm.
Inhale slowly through your nose, feeling your stomach expand to press into your hand.
Keep the hand on your chest as still as possible.
Engage your stomach muscles and draw them toward your spine as you exhale using pursed lips.
Again, keep the hand on your upper chest as still as possible.
Continue breathing like this for the duration of your exercise session.
After you learn this breathing technique lying down, you may wish to try it while sitting in a chair. This is slightly more difficult.
Diaphragm breathing in a chair
Sit in a comfortable position with your knees bent.
Relax your shoulders, head, and neck.
Put one hand on your upper chest and the other below your rib cage so you can feel the movement of your diaphragm.
Inhale slowly through your nose so your stomach presses against your hand.
Keep the hand on your chest as still as possible.
Engage your abdominal muscles as you exhale through pursed lips, keeping the hand on your upper chest still.
Continue breathing like this for the duration of your exercise session.
Once you’re comfortable with both positions, incorporate diaphragmatic breathing into your daily activities. Practice it when you:
exercise
walk
climb stairs
finish carrying or lifting objects
shower
Tips for better breathing
Here are a few ways you can breathe more easily and efficiently:
Adjust your sleeping position
Try sleeping on your side with pillows elevating your head and a pillow between your legs. This aligns your spine, which opens your airways and may prevent snoring.
Or try sleeping on your back with bent knees. Place a pillow under your head and your knees.
Sleeping on your back, however, may cause your tongue to block your breathing tube. It’s not recommended if you have sleep apnea or you snore .
Consider lifestyle changes
Maintain a moderate weight and eat nutritious foods, including foods rich in antioxidants .
The flu and pneumonia vaccines help prevent lung infections and encourage lung health . Avoid:
smoking, or try a smoking cessation program
inhaling secondhand smoke
environmental irritants
Use air filters and reduce irritants such as artificial fragrances, mold, and dust to improve indoor air quality.
Meditate
Practice meditation regularly. It can be as simple as focusing on your breath without controlling it. Added benefits may include:
reduced job-related stress
reduced feelings of loneliness and increased social contact
improved symptoms of fibromyalgia
Practice good posture
Good posture ensures that your chest and thoracic region of your spine can fully expand. Your rib cage and diaphragm will also fully expand, increasing the range of motion on the front side of your body.
By practicing good posture, you’ll breathe more effectively and efficiently, allowing for more ease in your daily activities.
Sing it out
Consider taking up singing to improve your breathing and lung function.
People with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who sing regularly may improve :
their knowledge of breathing
breathing control
quality of life
Singing helps you breathe more slowly and deeply and strengthens your breathing muscles if you have a lung condition.
Stretch and flex
Take steps to relieve any tightness in your shoulders , chest, and back .
Do exercises focusing on flexibility , resistance, and stretching to improve posture . This can help you fully expand your ribcage in all directions when you breathe.
Stretching or massages may help loosen tight areas. You should also engage in activities that keep you active.
Other breathing techniques
Regular breathing exercises may help you become more aware and controllable of your breath. Examples of breathing exercises include:
4-7-8
pursed lips
alternate nostril
coordinated
deep
huff cough
numbered
Takeaway
Breathing may not be something you think about a lot. You use many body parts during respiration. Because of this, good posture and certain breathing patterns are more effective for comfortable breathing than others.
Breathing practices may enhance breathing effectiveness. If you live with a lung condition, bringing this awareness to daily routines may improve breathing and participation in your daily activities.
Speak with a doctor about any questions about your breathing and breathing exercises you’d like to try.
Connect with us!
Explore our COPD hub .
Sign up for our COPD newsletter .
Join our Bezzy COPD online community.
