How to stop racing thoughts
People may be able to manage racing thoughts with steps such as deep breathing, distraction techniques, and exercise. However, medication and psychotherapy may be necessary in chronic cases.
Racing thoughts are thoughts that come quickly, one after the other. They may relate to one subject or many different ones.
Racing thoughts can affect a person’s ability to sleep or to focus on a single topic.
If racing thoughts move in a sequence, they can end in a worst-case scenario. A person may hear them as a voice they cannot ignore or as background noise in the brain.
Treating an underlying health condition or learning some coping strategies may help manage these thoughts.
What causes racing thoughts?
There is no single cause of racing thoughts. According to a 2023 article , racing thoughts may be a symptom of bipolar disorder , especially during a manic phase .
However, racing thoughts may also be a part of various other issues and conditions, including:
anxiety
depression
panic disorder
chronic stress
the use of recreational drugs, such as amphetamine or cocaine
some prescription drugs, such as dexamethasone
medical conditions, such as: stroke multiple sclerosis (MS) Cushing’s syndrome
stroke
multiple sclerosis (MS)
Cushing’s syndrome
traumatic brain injury
Other conditions that may lead to racing thoughts include:
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
According to Mental Health America (MHA) , racing thoughts may also signal the start of psychosis .
Focus on now
For some people, racing thoughts stem from something that has not happened and may never happen. Others focus on things that happened in the past, which they cannot change.
People who experience racing thoughts can try to focus on what is happening now. Saying to themselves, “I won’t worry about the past or the future, I’ll focus on what I can control,” is a good place to start.
Take deep breaths
The body’s natural panic response is to speed up the heart and breathing rate. This may happen when the mind begins racing.
MHA suggests that taking slow, deep breaths can reduce the body’s stress response and promote a feeling of calm, helping to quiet or stop racing thoughts.
The following strategy might help. Try:
breathing in slowly while counting to five
holding the breath for a few seconds
breathing out while counting to five
A person can practice deep breathing anytime, without any specialized training.
Learn about box breathing .
Think about other options
Racing thoughts can end up in a worst-case scenario, and it can be easy for someone to build up a sense of disaster.
This can lead to a cycle of more anxiety and continued racing thoughts.
A person can try to counter this by:
repeating to themselves that this worst-case scenario is not going to happen
considering how likely it is that the worst case will happen
thinking about more desirable alternatives that could occur
Instead of, “I’ll get fired for that mistake,” change the thought to, “Everyone makes mistakes, and I’ll do what I can to make it right.”
Use mantras
According to a 2018 review , research has found that mantras or mantra meditation can help disregard internal and external distractions. During this time a person repeats a word or phrase (silently or aloud) and this can act as an overriding vehicle for mental speech, such as racing thoughts.
Repeating phrases such as, “I can get through this,” or “It will be okay,” might help.
Mantras allow the mind to focus on one simple positive or encouraging thought, turning it away from its racing thoughts.
Try distractions
MHA also indicates that distractions, such as a favorite hobby, especially a calming one, can quiet the mind and help a person focus on something other than racing thoughts.
Depending on a person’s preferences, options for reducing stress and finding distraction may include:
using coloring books
painting
gardening
cooking
singing or playing an instrument
going for a walk or other outdoor activity
watch a movie or listen to some music
Exercise
Regular physical activity can improve mental well-being and might be helpful during an episode of racing thoughts.
A 2023 review notes that exercise has been shown to improve mood and overall quality of life. It can also help with sleep and various mental health conditions, including anxiety and depression.
Current guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per week for adults. The CDC also recommends muscle-strengthening exercises twice a week.
If racing thoughts start developing, walking, jogging, or similar activities may help settle the mind.
Inhale lavender essential oil
Lavender has a reputation for being calming, and some research supports this claim.
A 2020 meta-analysis found that research shows for short-term management of anxiety, aromatherapy using lavender oil was effective.
A systemic review from 2019 also found that using lavender oil in massage may also be effective in calming anxiety. However, more research is needed.
Do not apply the oil to the skin without first diluting it with a carrier oil, such as almond or olive oil.
Although research suggests essential oils may have some health benefits, it is important to remember that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not monitor or regulate the purity or quality of these oils. A person should talk with a healthcare professional before using essential oils and research the quality of a particular brand’s products. It is also important to always do a patch test before trying a new essential oil.
Medical care to manage racing thoughts
Many mental health conditions can cause racing thoughts, and it is important to seek advice from a healthcare or mental health professional for diagnosis and treatment.
A mental health professional may use a questionnaire to assess the type of thoughts a person has and why they are happening.
Individuals who experience the following may wish to consider speaking with a healthcare or mental health professional:
repeated episodes of racing thoughts
a low mood and symptoms of depression lasting more than 2 weeks
sleep problems
symptoms of anxiety, ADHD, or other mental health issues
There is no single treatment for racing thoughts, but some options include:
medication, psychotherapy, and other treatments for mood disorders and other mental health conditions
reviewing medications that may trigger racing thoughts
Mental health resources
Visit our dedicated hub for more research-backed information and resources on mental health and well-being.
Summary
A person may experience racing thoughts in response to a traumatic event, but they can also indicate an underlying health condition.
Many of the conditions that cause racing thoughts require professional guidance from a doctor or mental health professional for ongoing management.
A person should see a healthcare professional if they experience racing thoughts without an apparent reason or have any other symptoms that last longer than 2 weeks.
These symptoms may indicate an underlying mental health condition that may require treatment.
