How does isolation affect mental health?
Although physical distancing is an effective way to slow the spread of many viruses, it can also lead to feelings of loneliness and isolation, especially in older adults.
People are distancing themselves from others to help prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19 . However, isolation has a significant impact on health, contributing to conditions such as depression , anxiety , and dementia .
For this reason, the World Health Organization (WHO) encourage people to continue socializing at a distance, such as by phone or via online platforms.
This article discusses how isolation and mental health affect each other. It also explores who is most at risk, some signs and symptoms that suggest a person may need support, and how people can deal with loneliness and isolation.
Isolation and mental health
According to the WHO , social support networks can have a significant positive effect on health. In fact, many countries are now treating loneliness as a health priority.
Social connection is crucial for both mental and physical health. Some researchers even believe that relationships are a biological need and vital to our well-being and survival.
Some of the mental health risks associated with loneliness and isolation may include:
depression
anxiety
schizophrenia
suicide
dementia
Alzheimer’s disease
Researchers have also identified links between loneliness and some physical conditions, such as heart disease and breast cancer .
Coronavirus resources
For more advice on COVID-19 prevention and treatment, visit our coronavirus hub .
Who is at risk?
The world is currently dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic, and health organizations around the globe are urging people to practice physical distancing . Physical distancing is an effective method for preventing the spread of SARS-CoV-2, but it may lead to loneliness.
Older adults are especially likely to feel isolated. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, researchers estimated that isolation affected more than 8 million older adults .
One of the reasons that older adults are more at risk of loneliness is that they often experience important life changes, such as:
retirement
widowhood
children leaving home
age-related health problems
These changes can break social ties, making it more difficult to socialize. People with disabilities or health conditions that limit physical activity may also find it more difficult to socialize outside the home.
Age and underlying health conditions are also risk factors for developing severe COVID-19 symptoms. The best way to protect vulnerable people is to practice physical distancing, but this can also exacerbate loneliness in people who already feel isolated.
The rate of loneliness in the United States is also increasing. Some experts suggest that a growing number of people in the U.S. experience isolation regularly. Other nations — including Germany, Australia, and the United Kingdom — say that they are facing a loneliness epidemic.
Some societal trends may also cause social disconnection. For example, the average household size has decreased, and many more couples are deciding not to have children.
Researchers have also recorded lower attendance in social groups, lower participation in religious groups, and a decline in the average size of social groups in the U.S.
Other lifestyle factors that make it more likely that someone will experience loneliness include:
divorce
living alone
being single
Signs and symptoms to look out for
Some signs and symptoms that suggest that isolation is affecting a person’s mental health may include:
feelings of depression and anxiety
aggressive behavior
passive attitude
poor sleep quality
cognitive decline
altered memory
poor self-care or self-neglect
Researchers believe that the consequences of loneliness and isolation are different depending on a person’s age.
For example, people aged 18–49 years old may struggle to focus, or they may eat more frequently. Meanwhile, children and young adolescents may experience more cognitive, behavioral, and emotional difficulties.
How to stay connected
Finding ways to connect with others can reduce the effect of loneliness on people’s mental health as they shelter in place.
Reaching out to loved ones, friends, and those in need takes many forms today. With multiple platforms to choose from, people can connect via:
mail
phone and text
email
social media
video chat platforms
How to look after others
With physical distancing protocols in place around the world, the WHO recommend helping people in need during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is a good idea to contact members of the community who may be at risk of isolation, loneliness, and health complications.
Knocking on a neighbor’s door and staying a safe distance away, or calling them on the telephone, can remind them that they have nearby support. Setting up regular phone calls or video chats can also help decrease feelings of loneliness.
Sending someone care packages is another way to stay connected. People looking after vulnerable individuals can pick up medications or drop off groceries and other essentials at their doorstep.
Also, although many businesses are closed during the COVID-19 pandemic, it is possible to find exercise programs, beauty and grooming videos, and courses online. Participating in online activities with other people can promote a feeling of connection and decrease loneliness.
When to seek help
People experiencing loneliness should seek help from a doctor or therapist if they notice any signs or symptoms of anxiety or depression. These may include :
restlessness or irritability
persistent worry
sleeping too much or too little
an inability to concentrate
suicidal thoughts
When checking in on someone else, it is worth checking if they are eating, sleeping, and taking care of themselves. If they are struggling, they may benefit from support.
Help is out there
If you or someone you know is in crisis and considering suicide or self-harm, please seek support:
Call or text the 988 Lifeline at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org. Caring counselors are available to listen and provide free and confidential support 24/7.
Text HOME to the Crisis Text Line at 741741 to connect with a volunteer crisis counselor for free and confidential support 24/7.
Not in the United States? Find a helpline in your country with Befrienders Worldwide .
Call 911 or your local emergency services number if you feel safe to do so.
If you’re calling on behalf of someone else, stay with them until help arrives. You may remove weapons or substances that can cause harm if you can do so safely.
If you’re not in the same household, stay on the phone with them until help arrives.
Summary
The COVID-19 pandemic has forced people to self-isolate to prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2. However, loneliness may have serious health consequences and can exacerbate conditions such as depression, anxiety, and dementia.
Socializing from a distance, such as via online platforms, can help ease feelings of loneliness and prevent its complications, especially for people who are vulnerable.
Anyone experiencing changes in their mental or physical health due to isolation should speak to a doctor.
